It probably has some
questions, but if you want to just take us through for a couple of minutes why you
think,
what the stakes are for you and your members-
Sure
... why you're complaining about the issue
holistically, and then we've got some specific follow-ups for you.
No problem. Cool. Thank you very much for the opportunity to
address you. So look, I'm representing, as you know, the Wiri Business Association.
We believe we're the industrial engine of Auckland, and we're a
critical hub for New Zealand's supply chain.
We represent more than 700 businesses and about 600 individual
property owners in the area. So I'm here for two reasons, two
references. One is the Vehicle Use and Parking By-law
2025 under Auckland Transport, and also the Land Transport
2004 rule.
Essentially, the first one I'll just speak to is the Auckland Transport byelaw.
Just to be fair to AT right from the outset, that Vehicle
Use and Parking By-law only came into force on the 1st of July
2025, so last year. We're reasonable people.
We recognize that
rolling out new regulatory frameworks does take time, and we're not
asking for overnight miracles.
However, the issue we're facing in Wiri, and it's also an issue in other places
in Auckland and around the country,
is historic and systemic. So when Parliament grants a new
regulatory tool, the expectation is that it'll be deployed first
where the issue is the greatest. So our concerns in
relation to that particular byelaw
relate to clauses 13 (1) , 13 (2) , 13 (3) , and
clause 26, and they relate to the prohibiting or
restricting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any
road to provide for the safe operation of the road and the avoidance of
nuisance and danger.
So,
the byelaw gives Auckland Transport the explicit power to prohibit the stopping and
parking of heavy motor vehicles to ensure safe operation and to
avoid danger in that area. However,
we haven't got the necessary resolutions to
enforce that
in Wiri. We're not talking just about daytime congestion.
We've got heavy vehicles parking in the area overnight
as well, completely unlit, failing to display the legally
required red lights
at the back. And the Wiri Business
Association has been doing the heavy lifting for Auckland Transport.
So the last nine months, our security teams each night have
been going around recording the vehicles that are parked without red lights,
taking a photo of them, recording the location, time, and vehicle
registration, and then sending it to Auckland Transport,
who then,
to be fair, do go on and ticket a number of those vehicles.
And I believe the number is about 2,000 infringements that have
been issued in the last nine months thanks to the work
that we've done in giving them that evidence on a plate.
The other issue we have is clause 4, and that clause restricts the
repairing or modifying of vehicles on the road or in a public place,
and it restricts the dumping or discharging of fluids to help minimize public
nuisance. So what is concerning for us there is the lack
of resolutions and enforcement regarding roadside vehicle repairs
and fluid dumping.
So our roads are effectively being used as open-air mechanic
workshops.
A lot of these trucks are owner-operators, and they don't have their own yards, and
they just park up day and night. They're there working on their
trucks and so on, repairing them, changing motors, tipping
oil down the drains. We've got photographic and video
evidence of that happening. So when we see these things
happening, we're advising Auckland Transport immediately,
so we're not just sitting there doing nothing.
The byelaw is supposed to minimize that public nuisance and that environmental
damage. But without targeted resolutions in industrial areas like
Wiri, the byelaw is really just ink on paper.
So because the byelaw is entirely discretionary,
Auckland Transport has no mandate to prioritize the areas needing the most
resource. It has been nine months since the byelaw went live,
but the issue goes back quite a bit further.
When this particular byelaw was being consulted upon, we,
along with the Road Carriers Association of New Zealand, met with Auckland
Transport representatives and highlighted the issue there.
Also, just before the byelaw came into force, so in early
2025, we held a dedicated meeting with Auckland
Transport's compliance parking manager...
compliance manager, sorry, and they heard directly from our members about the
frustration that they're hearing.
It's the number one issue that we're getting complaints
about.
Gary,
I know you have more to say.
That's all right.
But could you give us a moment just for some questions to you?
What, sorry?
Just for some questions.
Yep.
I'll come to
any other members. But what I need to ask you is,
how does the problem in Wiri compare to the rest of the city?
And have you, as a business association manager, spoken to any
other business associations who have dealt with the same problem around the
country, and do they deal with it better?
So I think this is a quick first question, but in terms of other associations
around Auckland, we are aware that it is an issue in other
places.
Mm-hmm.
Even some areas that don't have business associations, it
is an area. I see there was an article on Radio New Zealand yesterday
about parking in some of the residential streets in Manurewa, so they
are also experiencing it. But the problemOh, and
sorry, also the National Road Carriers Association, we have met with them
and their representatives several times about this.
It's not only just in Wery, because, of course, the Lane Transport
road user rule refers to parking with due care and
reasonable consideration-
Mm
... and covers nighttime lighting for heavy vehicles.
It is clearly insufficient-
Yeah
... because no one is
able to
enforce it. So,
we believe that that particular law,
from a nationwide perspective, should be looked at to see where the gaps are in the
legislation and how it can be made so that it can be enforced.
Briefly, let's discuss the gaps. We've only got two more minutes with you.
Yep, sure.
So,
as I understand it, there are some rules which you think are there but not being
enforced, and then there are also some rules that don't exist that should-
Correct
... and we'll have an opportunity to discuss that with Auckland Council and
Auckland Transport in a second.
Are there a few of those gaps that you want to highlight so that we understand what
you think is missing?
Sorry, say that one again.
What do you think is missing from the set of rules in
the toolkit for you and AT to enforce?
Look, I guess it's just...
I don't know how to put this into the right terms, but
I guess the rules are there, but they're not being enforced, and no one's being
mandated.
It's sort of like when we have issues where we've got trucks parked on either side
of the road. We've got other businesses that cannot get their vehicles
out of their driveways because these trucks are legally parked.
We plead with Auckland Transport for things like yellow broken lines, just so we
can enable these businesses to operate.
Mm.
And that is a mission and a half. We've managed to do it on one road,
but the rest of it, it's sort of they put their hands up, and they're either not
interested or don't believe it's a priority.
So it's sort of making them do that.
But then when you've got that road user rule, and it says the
safe operation of roads, and due consideration to
care, well, clearly it's not working in our industrial area.
It's not working around the country from our conversations with the National Road
Carrier, and it's not working in residential areas.
We've got a problem that is just getting worse.
Mm-hmm.
So you've got the rules there. It's not being enforced.
Awesome. There goes our time, but is it even as-
That's all right.
No? Okay. Thank you so much.
Welcome.
You're welcome to stay. We will have-
No, I understand
... further submitters on here.
Thank you.
Kate from Auckland Council. You there, Kate?
Pop your camera on if you are.
Katie.
Katie?
Sorry.
Hello.
Kia ora. Kia ora.
Thank you very much for joining the committee.
We've got 10 minutes with you.
Were you able to watch the submission prior to this?
Yes.
Great.
Yes. I'm just wondering if my colleague Sarah has joined.
Sarah.
Yep. Is Sarah there?
Yes. Sarah's joined. Thank you very much.
Awesome.
Yes, we've got 10 minutes with you both.
Great.
Would welcome a few minutes to talk us through the operation of the byelaw,
and then we've got some questions for you as well.
Sure. Kia ora koutou, and thank you for hearing from us today.
So my name is Katie Bexley, and I am the Associate General Counsel of Public
Law at Auckland Council. And I'm joined by my colleague, Sarah
Preston, who is a solicitor in the legal team at Auckland Transport.
So we're here representing both Auckland Council and Auckland Transport today,
given that the vehicle use and parking byelaw is a joint byelaw of both
Auckland Council and Auckland Transport.
And also because of the impending reform of transport governance in
Auckland under the local government Auckland Council Transport Governance
Amendment bill. It's quite a mouthful.
Which is currently progressing through Parliament, and which will see Auckland
Council becoming responsible for transport-related byelaws in
Auckland
very soon.
So we've provided our submission in writing to the committee this morning, which
sets out our position in relation to the specifics of the complaint,
which hopefully you will have a copy of.
But I'll just speak briefly to the key points in there, and then
we're happy, of course, to take any questions.
So firstly, AT and Council acknowledge the concerns raised
by the Wery Business Association regarding truck parking and
related activities on streets within the Wery industrial district,
and the impact that such activities can have on safety, business
operations, and the local environment.
However, we don't consider that there is a legislative gap or that there has been
an unusual or unexpected use of power in terms of standing order
3272C.
And the primary reason for that is that the byelaw gives the relevant authority,
being AT or Council, as the case may be, the power to
make resolutions or prohibitions for the matters set out in the byelaw.
And as mentioned, that includes in relation to stopping, standing, or parking
of vehicles on any road,
and with that reference to Clause 13 of the byelaw.
So as noted, that power to make resolutions or prohibitions is
discretionary, and that is that the byelaw empowers the making of
those resolutions or prohibitions if and when the circumstances arise
requiring such action. It doesn't require the making of
those resolutions or prohibitions.
That approach is, of course, consistent with the empowering provisions in the Land
Transport Act in Section 13 of the Bylaws Act, and there are
good policy reasons for it.
So as you'll be aware, Auckland is a huge area
with a huge number of roads, and those roads require different
controls depending on the location.
And often changes to those controls will need to be made quickly, and an
approach of providing for resolutions to be made outside
of the byelaw itself provides more
flexibility for creating those context-specific traffic
and parking rules across the region rather than having all of those rules
in the byelaw itself.Safeguards are built into
the process for making those resolutions, including
requiring options assessments, internal and external engagement,
so with local boards, affected residents and landowners, businesses,
community groups, other partners such as NZTA and the police,
and of course, compliance with standard public law decision-making requirements.
So it's a really robust process that is followed.
And then just in terms of the
lack of specific rules around preventing roadside vehicle
repairs that is referenced in the complaint, we just
note that Auckland Transport and Council do have other bylaws regulating
these activities, and that includes AT's activities
in the road corridor bylaw and Council's public safety and
nuisance bylaw. Both of those have provisions in there that
regulate those kinds of activities around undertaking vehicle repairs and
dumping of material on the roads.
And Auckland Transport and Council do have mechanisms available to enforce
breaches of these bylaws, which they can and do use,
as has been mentioned. So I'll just hand over to my colleague, Sarah, and
she'll just talk through a bit of what AT has been doing in terms of that
enforcement.
Kia ora. My name's Sarah. So as Gary mentioned
earlier, AT does do a lot of parking enforcement across the region, but
also in the Waire and Manukau area.
Our parking team have seen an increase in different behaviors
over the last few years,
including
up to 2,000 or about 2,000 tickets for failing to park
a large vehicle or a truck. So there does have to be a size
difference there
within the legal requirements for parking, and that can include warrant of fitness
or failing to have a red light at the back of the vehicle.
And that has been over the past two months.
We do note that approximately 90% of vehicles that are parked during the day are
parked legally, and we are limited on what enforcement we can take when
vehicles are parked legally. Obviously, we can't
go around issuing tickets for things that don't exist, so we don't typically do
that. And then when there are repairs that we
have been identifying and that we have
witnessed, we have either warned the operator or the driver,
and we have referred those to the appropriate agency.
So whether that's internally for our teams or whether that's to council for
environmental concerns.
Mm-hmm.
And finally, I'd like to reiterate that we do acknowledge the complaints and would
love to work cohesively to get an outcome that
meets everybody's requirements.
Love to hear it. Thank you, and thank you to you both for making yourselves
available this afternoon. I think we have some questions.
We've got 10 minutes with you for that. Let me just start.
So
what we are interested in is whether the purpose of the Land Transport
Act is being realized by the practical
outcome here. So looking at the complaint,
on the face of it, it seems that there we don't have
rules. As you say, Sarah, there's nothing illegal about the
way that many of these trucks are parked, and yet
what's being presented to us is that there are safety concerns, that there are
environmental concerns, and those are things that the Land Transport Act
sets out to address.
And so then we come down, Katie, as you've set out,
there is a very broadly drafted bylaw here
in 13 [3] ,
which allows the relevant
authority to make those laws, and completely accepting
that it will be different in different areas.
But the concern for this committee is whether the
intention of Parliament here to make sure that the rules in place are for
safety and for any negative environmental impacts and the
mitigation of the public nuisance that might otherwise occur
if rules aren't in place, is being thwarted by the lack of a rule.
So can you take us through, Katie,
firstly,
why is the bylaw drafted in this way, which is very, very
open-ended? Almost you can imagine in a
way that would not require any rules to be created under it.
And then did AT in fact consider
whether rules should be drafted that would deal with some of
the issues that we're seeing 2,000
infringements and a range of other things that are not in
fact illegal, but are still unsafe or create environmental
harm happening in a particular area.
And if those things were considered, then why
did rules not come about after those considerations?
So I'll start off, and then I'll hand over to Sarah to
answer some more of it from the Auckland Transport perspective.
I guess in terms of the reason why the bylaw is
framed like that is really, as I
mentioned, it's a more flexible approach that allows
for
AT and Council to be responsive to issues as they
arise, and to create...
Because obviously the
process required for changing a bylaw
itself takes a long time, right?
It's
rightly a really robust process that takes a long time, and
obviously for the really substantive
regulation that is in the bylaw
itself-Providing a flexible
approach whereby council and AT
can make resolutions and further prohibitions
outside of the byelaw itself allows for that flexible,
responsive,
context-specific regulation where it
arises and when it's needed.
The fact that it is empowering and doesn't require
the making of resolutions in any kind of time-bound way
doesn't mean that AT and council don't make
resolutions under those clauses.
And Sarah will probably be able to speak to this
with greater detail, but there are resolutions that are made under
those provisions. And Sarah, I don't know if you
are in a position to speak to the process by which those come
about, how they're raised, and the process that is gone through by the
Traffic Control Committee to consider those when they come up.
And not just the process. Was it considered?
Did anyone at the Traffic Control Committee consider, with the number of
incidents that are not in fact illegal, but are in fact a problem,
should we have a rule?
Yes. So the Traffic Control Committee, they approve resolutions
across the city. They also approve other things in other parts of legislation
that relate to traffic controls, such as speed humps and traffic lights and
lane layouts, and all great things like that that we need for our
roads. We do thousands of them a week or a month.
We meet fortnightly, or TCC meets fortnightly.
They've probably done close to 7,000 over the last couple of
years. These are not
big, long, lengthy special consultative procedures that we do.
So we do that for the byelaw, and then when we get to the individual resolutions,
it gives us a little bit more flexibility to say, "We're going to work within the
controls that we consulted on under the byelaw,"
and then we make them for that area.
So for some things, that might be time-restricted parking, it might be broken
yellow lines, but we're working with the relevant people in the relevant areas.
And so some local boards and some business associations are
happy with paid parking. Some of them are not.
Some of them want some speed humps to slow down the boy racers.
Some of them don't, and we can work with each of them individually, and that gives
us the flexibility to tailor the result for each
area or each set of people, depending on where we are.
So what we might do in
Orewa area might be very different from what
we do in Parnell versus what we might do in, say,
Pukekohe or Manukau, for example.
So, having the flexibility to do what we need to do across
those areas in a shorter period of time means that if something is wrong, we can
quickly go back and change those whilst working alongside developers and
agencies where we need to. So the TCC's
got a little bit of a robust process, but it's not just about this one particular
byelaw. It covers a lot of other things that we're doing in that space.
Has the committee considered whether
rules that have been suggested by the Wiri Business Association
are required?
We have the options to do certain things.
It doesn't need to be in the byelaw, I think is what the TCC...
Having the ability to do them under resolution rather than
specified in a byelaw across the city means that whatever is
put in there, then the whole city has to have it, and that wouldn't work for some
areas.
Maybe they have.
Okay, it's the final question. I'll hand over.
Okay, we have one from Joseph Mooney.
Just with the 2,000 infringements in the last nine months,
helpful information for us,
probably represents a relatively large sum
for Auckland Transport. Do you know what that is?
I don't know because I don't know what the penalty is off by heart.
I'm not a litigator or prosecutor unfortunately.
No. No problem.
So I don't have that one. I don't believe they're particularly large.
They'll be somewhere between $50 and $150-
Yeah
... because they're primarily the large ones.
Most of them are for failing to have a red light or failing to have a warrant of
fitness
or a COF, depending on the vehicle.
And if we do get a complaint during the day about a particular truck, then we'll
come back at night and revisit that same truck if it's still there.
So we are trying our best to proactively
follow up on the complaints in a timely manner so that we can see them.
Some of them are not-- So when we talk about rules, some of them are things that we
can enforce, and some of them are just obligations.
So you have a duty to park safely. It's not a rule that you have to park
safely. It's a little bit of a difference there.
But you can't park within a certain number of meters from the intersection, which
we can enforce.
Okay. Joseph Mooney.
Yeah. Thank you both.
Useful to hear. And I'm interested in the public
policy
aspect of this, because we've heard from Gary that businesses
can't effectively operate, can't access their
businesses. And so my question is whether the
byelaw is fit for purpose
and whether your enforcement
agents
can effectively do anything about that public policy issue, which
does seem to be significant from what we heard from Gary.
I think
to the extent that either Sarah or I can answer that
as lawyers and not policy people, but
I think the
way that the byelaw is set up and framed to
enable the making of resolutions and prohibitions under it,
and separate from the byelaw itself, actually assists in that,
so that when issues like businesses not being able to effectively
operate arise, and where those issues are raised
witAT or council, they
can be looked at and consideration can be given as to
whether a
resolution restricting parking or putting in
yellow lines or
whatever the mechanism might be, whether that is
appropriate in the circumstance to deal with the issues that are being
raised.
Yeah. That's the central question, right?
This is a very broadly drafted by-law.
It's therefore a broadly applicable
executive power. Our job is to work out whether it is in fact doing
that, giving effect to--
There are trade-offs at play here between truck drivers and business owners.
And so whether in fact the decision-maker has
considered that, and you've told me
perhaps.
And whether then the consideration
did give effect to the primary purpose of the Land Transport Act, which includes
safety and improvements on the environment
and ensuring that there isn't a public nuisance aspect of that.
And we're still a little bit confused about that.
Is there anything else that you can help us with in unpacking those
two things?
I think from my perspective, it really comes down
to
the complaints being raised with AT
and council, whoever is the relevant authority for the particular road.
Because as the authority, if we're not aware of
the issues, then we can't consider it.
But where the issues are raised with us, then
they should be considered. From our perspective as lawyers,
then they should be considered. I can't, and I'm not sure if,
Sarah, if you can speak to whether, the business association in
this particular case, whether those concerns have
been taken to the Traffic Control Committee for consideration.
But that is
absolutely the intention for how this works.
It's just we can only consider it when the issues are raised-
Okay. Thank you
... with the authority. Yeah.
Thanks very much. Thank you both for your time.
Thank you. Thank you for having us.
Gary, we can't enter into a back and forth with you.
But as normal-